if you've seen a joke written down
you haven't heard the joke
there's a dialogue there's an
interaction with the audience there's
there's a difference between seeing the
words that were in that joke and hearing
that joke and experiencing that joke in
the same way that's probably true for
the most daring jokes you know because
when you're in a live theater and you
say something that's right on the edge
right yeah hilariously funny it's
because you're carried away with the
moment you get this witty idea and bang
you nail it but that sort and that's
right at the edge of what's permissible
you take a head out of context it's a
catastrophe here's the thing again you
know you can you can joke about anything
but not with anyone you know yeah that's
for sure my audience is not the same as
your audience
[Music]
hey everybody I'm thrilled today to have
with me Mr Jimmy Carr one of the world's
funniest men the one of the world's
purposefully funniest men which is an
important distinction
an award-winning comedian writer and
television host Mr Jimmy Carr is one of
the biggest selling comedy acts in the
world is performed in venues in 40
countries his last tour best of Ultimate
Gold greatest hits It's a somewhat
narcissistic title we might add sold
almost half a million tickets globally
with his current show terribly funny set
to exceed that figure by the end of
2022. he's a household name in UK
television hosting Channel 4's 8 out of
ten cats and some variants of that and
presenting comedy Central's roast battle
UK and your face or Mine He's also
performed as part of The Royal Variety
performance three times which is
something particularly impressive to us
Canucks enamored archaically with the
queen
he was the first UK comedian to sign a
stand-up deal I think that means a
comedy deal rather than a straight deal
with Netflix in 2015 releasing business
2016 and best of Ultimate Gold Greatest
Hits 2017. he's also performed in my
favorite City Montreal at the Just for
Laughs Comedy Festival which I'd highly
recommend since 2003 with more
appearances than any other UK act in
that time his YouTube channel where he's
accrued over 500 000 subscribers and
130 million views was launched in 2018
and because all that is not enough he's
also a published author he co-wrote the
naked jape uncovering The Hidden World
of jokes in 2007 and his highly
anticipated Memoir before and laughter
launched in September 2021 and made the
Sunday Times bestseller list
so I have a question for you to start I
have to know the answer to this this is
serious business a 15 foot tall replica
of Carr's head was used in an
advertising campaign for Walker's crisp
and has subsequently appeared in various
Publications and then it was transported
from Preston to the wickerman festival I
have to know about that how in the world
did that come about and why there was
there was a a charitable campaign for
this brand of crisps called Walkers very
beloved British crisps and they built an
enormous model of my head I mean who
knows why my head's quite big enough as
it is and then it's been turned into a
bar and so I occasionally my Twitter
will blow up once every couple of years
when they transport it because it goes
on the back of a flatbed truck and they
take it up and down the motorway and
people just go was that an enormous
Effigy of Jimmy Carr as he finally lost
his mind
um did you say it was a bar it was a bar
yeah they turned into a bar and it was
huge thing you could sort of climb up
inside it so they turned it into a bar
I don't know I mean it's a weird world
we live in isn't it
yeah it's it's weird to say the absolute
least so so your head is a bar okay well
I that's an answer and thank you very
much for that so um what's the biggest
venue you performed at I mean I've
played a couple of stadiums I've done
like shows in stadiums but I think like
often when you've been like a stadium
like an arena like a 10 or 12 000 but
it's very much Whispering into the abyss
uh you you're sort of you're telling
your jokes and they're sort of they they
you're just on send and I like comedy to
be a conversation and even if there's
like two and a half three thousand
people in in an Amphitheater in a in a
room you feel like there's a discursive
element so if something happens in the
room I want to be aware of it let me ask
you that about that immediately so
because I always think of my lectures in
in venues like that as a conversation as
well and I also found that if they get
too large and maybe that's more than
four thousand something like that then
it is in a sense Whispering into the
abyss it's it's as if the the individual
people start to disappear and then you
can't make contact with your audience
the same way yeah it's like it's that
thing about what's the right
um what's the right side you know the
medium is the message I suppose you're
Canadian of course you'll be quoting
McLaren the idea that you go rock and
roll feels like it can sustain a bigger
audience than accommodate and maybe a
lecture even a little bit smaller than
that like what's the the you know you
need a critical mass for the audience
that you also need it to be the right
level that you feel like no part of this
thing and you're an important part of it
so it feels like in a comedy show if
someone at the back of the room shouts
something out I have to be able to hear
it and I have to be able to respond to
it otherwise they're not really in the
room in the comments station so and I
like that I encourage people to join in
I always think there's a very special
thing when you become a comedian and you
find your own audience there's lots of
different audiences but my audience come
and see me and they have we share a
sense of humor and there's a sense one
of my favorite quotes about comedy is
you know uh laughter is the shortest
distance between two people the idea
that it connects us and that we have the
same sense of humor and in that room we
can joke and we can mess around and and
they can be as funny as me that like I
don't have sometimes when you go and see
a musician you're just blown away by
their talent you think this guy is just
phenomenal I can't get over how great
they are I could never do that with a
comedian it's not quite the same thing
because you're thinking this guy's got
the same sense of humor as me you can be
as funny as anyone and you know my in my
book is about this really it's a it's a
a case for living through humor and I
think the best jokes the funniest things
that ever been said are not said by
famous comedians they're said by you and
your friendship group and your family
they're in jokes and comedy at its best
recreates the in-joke of the tribe
within within that space
yeah so the rock and roll types you know
when you go to a great concert in a
large venue
um if the if the audio is good it's as
if the the musicians are playing in the
sun in some sense to the crowd but I've
noticed in a lecture and it seems to be
the same in can in stand-up which I
think has very many similarities with a
good lecture in front of a live audience
that you have to be talking to
individuals and I always talk to one
person at a time in the crowd you know I
actually look at someone and I have a
little conversation with them and switch
to someone else and and so there is
something that seems to be intimately
and that's partly why it's a dialogue
and there's some seems to be something
that's intimately personal about that
that's not the same with with something
that's more art more more
purely artistic
yeah I think so I think you could
perform a a song in an empty room and
it's still a song and I think a comedy
act a joke without you know it's it's
feed line punchline laugh it's binary
you either get a laugh or you don't
without the crowd it isn't anything the
crowd performs such an important
functioning comedy above and beyond all
other art forms because no one can tell
you whether that's a good or a bad song
it's like well it's interpretation but
with comedy it either makes people laugh
or it doesn't it's a binary response
you're looking for it's one right I
think the critics immediately because we
don't need comedy to be mediated by
critics it either works for you or it
doesn't
yeah yeah the crowd is such an important
part of comedy and I think one of the
one of the things that I advocate in the
book is uh comedians because one of the
comedians kind of superpowers is failure
we're very good with failure because our
feedback loop is so short we're allowed
to take a million different chances
so when you go and see one of the greats
when you go and see Chris Rock or you
watch a Chris Rock Netflix special
um you're seeing an hour of material
that everything works and you're just
seeing the results you're not seeing the
the tireless campaign to get to that
hour the the thousands of jokes he tried
that didn't work the the the wordings
that weren't quite right on the jokes
that did work the the work you don't see
any of the you just see the results so
it's often that thing about the audience
is so has told him every step of the way
the audience is a genius Lenny Bruce
said it first the audience decide what
is and what isn't funny and what isn't
what isn't acceptable the audience will
tell you what's acceptable if you just
get a response from an audience that's
neither here nor there it has to be a
laugh even it's one of my favorite
noises in comedy is cognitive dissonance
and I get it a lot you get an enormous
laugh and then you get a sharp intake of
breath because the audience have had
laughed at something and then their
conscience has arrived late to the party
because the conscious part of the brain
or whether Consciousness lives is is a
bit slow a laugh is a reflex what you
find funny is is very much like your
tasting food or your
um sexual preferences how spicy you like
it really depends and you don't get to
choose that it chooses you some people
like spicy food some people like kinky
sex some people like edgy comedy and it
really chooses you so I love the idea
that sometimes a laugh will betray you
your sense of humor is a more it tells
you something about yourself you laugh
at something that's incredibly
transgressive and edgy and then you kind
of feel bad about it immediately and you
have to you know I like that cognitive
distance well then you have to then you
have to decide whether it's your sense
of humor that's at fault or the Judgment
of shame that immediately follows your
recognition of the fact that you laughed
at something dark and you know and
horrible and it isn't obvious to me that
that your sense of humor is likely to
err the same way your judgments are it
seems to me to be a pure spirit in some
sense and it's fascinating to me as well
that you're watching the audience while
you're performing comedy but you're also
saying that as you construct your
routines if you're a really really good
Watcher and listener then you try to see
what sticks so to speak you throw things
at the wall to see what sticks and if
you really pay attention to the audience
then they'll tell you how to be
successful right yes that's all you have
to do is collect that yeah you you're
really you're collecting data over 20
years so you've obviously got the thing
about Comics as well when they when they
do good audience work is it's like
airline pilots like if you ask an
airline pilot how long they've been a
pilot they won't give you it in years
they'll give you it in hours in the sky
and I think there's something about that
that's very
um I love the analogy because the amount
of time spent on stage is where you
learn that skill you become kind of
battle hardened to that or I suppose the
analogy in your world would be the
amount of time you spent researching or
the amount of time you spent in debate
so you're ready for that it's not your
first rodeo you've not had that exact
thing happen before but something
similar to it so you kind of know how to
respond to that and it's it's your
feedback loop is constantly you're kind
of getting better and improving
yeah well you know about about when I
generally tended right from the
beginning of my career not to lecture
from notes very much and once I got more
caught conversant with what I was
lecturing about I just abandoned notes
altogether and the huge advantage to
that was that I could continually watch
my students and I could see what it was
that I was saying that mattered in the
and what didn't and I could drop
everything that wasn't gripping and and
intriguing to them and you know to the
degree that I was attached to my notes
and a pre-prepared uh lecture then I
would lose the contact with the audience
and that's why it's boring in some ways
you know that reminds me of it reminds
me of the great Mike Tyson quote
um Mike Tyson said everyone's got a plan
until they get punched in the face
and I think when you're giving a speech
when you're doing a performance the
audience is the punch in the face you
didn't think they'd laugh at that bit or
you didn't they they look bored and
they're not engaged yet and I haven't
got them and I often use the analogy of
on my toes and on my heels at a show so
sometimes you'll go on a show you'll be
on your toes for the first five minutes
and then at some point in the show
you'll feel like I got him I got it yeah
we're there together that's right that's
when your body language changes a little
bit and then something happens yeah on
your toes again and there's a there's a
sense of a kind of an ebb and a flow to
it which is uh yeah it's uh it's
interesting because it's a it's a it's
an art form I guess uh that involves the
audience more than any other and the
audience with no training no prior uh
qualification required no instinctively
like anything above maybe 50 60 people
is like if a joke Works in front of 60
people it'll work in front of three
thousand
there's a real consistency and across
the globe as well I don't notice I mean
if you speak English I'm doing my
performance in English it's really it's
incredible how uniform audiences are and
what they will laugh at and how loud
they will laugh what gets an Applause
break what doesn't
so do you find a market difference now
maybe you haven't heard much of this
experience because you're so successful
but I don't like going to movies
especially comedies if the theater is
empty and I don't like lecturing to a
whole that's half full because I find it
much more difficult to to get that
response that you were describing of
everyone being there together and
something flowing if the place is
sporadically populated yeah I know I
would agree I mean I think I think
comedy is a social I think so let's
let's unpack that because the first bit
is about seeing a comedy movie in a
crowded Cinema is that's just smart
because laughter is tribal laughter is
it's a signal to other people it's it's
remote tickling laughter is about a
million years older than language it's a
different part of your throat than
you're using it's it's basically remote
grooming and I think it's I mean hey do
you know rats laugh yes
if you tickle them with a pencil eraser
yeah then they laugh but it's so Ultra
Sonic that you can't hear it unless you
settle down
oh you did you see about a horizon
special about laughter which I think is
on YouTube you'd be able to see but we
got dunbarring so Dunbar obviously the
Dunbar number is the uh the number of
friends you can have they often quote
them when they're talking about social
media and the interesting thing about
humans is we have a much higher Dunbar
number than silverback gorillas so it's
silverback gorillas can only groom
themselves literally
so they they you know if you've got 50
55 silverback gorillas in a group they
all groom each other a little bit every
day and that's how it goes that's the
size of that and that allows a certain
amount of specialization but humans can
get to 150. in in a Trine because we can
remote groom and remote grooming is
about laughter why do you and why do you
specifically make that argument that
it's specifically about laughter and why
is it that you associate it specifically
with grooming well because the the
purpose of laughter sort of pre-language
certainly would have been to sort of go
I am not a threat we are we are friends
there is a there's a connector so if you
think of the most basic example tickling
if you tickle a child it's an aggressive
act that is made benign by the laughter
so I was thinking a while ago with some
of my friends about the use of of
self-deprecation and humor among tough
working-class men because one of the
things and I really like that one of the
things that working-class men do and I I
really see this as a class-based thing
at least to some degree is that they
hurl insults at one another but they
have to be funny and then you know your
prowess your status in some sense within
the group if it's especially if it's a
friendship group but even sometimes if
it's a work group is how Barbed your
darts can be and still be funny that
would be the first one so how close can
you get to that line where it's actually
an insult and then the second thing
would be well can you take a damn joke
and let me tell you a story maybe you'd
like this so I'll work on this
okay I worked on this rail crew in
Northern Saskatchewan with a bunch of
guys a bunch of native Canadians a lot
of them had been in jail like it was a
rough bunch of guys and when I first
started working you know they're all
skeptical of me this is back when I was
a kid but I persevered and not you know
I made jokes and I wasn't a twit or or a
or an or any of those
things hopefully and then you know I got
into the group and that just went fine
but while I was there this guy came
along who was uh pretty touchy and
pretty arrogant and uh he brought this
lunch box along with him that it looked
like his mom packed which was a big
mistake socially he's supposed to bring
a paper bag that's not too showy and so
he got this appellation lunchbox and
that really made him mad they called me
howdy Duty which I didn't really like
and I asked the guy why and he said
because you look nothing like him which
I thought was a really good joke and
anyways lunchbox that's a good joke
lunchbox didn't like being called
lunchbox and he got irritated all the
time and so the guys on the crew and it
was stretched about half a mile down the
railway would throw pebbles at his hard
hat while he was working and that would
piss him off more and so the Rocks got
bigger and bigger and you know the whole
crew was watching this and now and then
a pretty decent sized Rock would hit
lunchbox on the head in the helmet and
everybody would sort of laugh under
their breath and you know he was chased
off in a week and all that was testing
to see if he could tolerate you know
being pushed a bit and they didn't want
him in the group if he couldn't do it
well I'm very I'm very interested in
that there's a lovely Australian turn of
phrase which is typically crude and
Australia uh you might have to believe
this but in Australia they have a phrase
that kind of sums it up you'll call
you'll call a mate and you'll call
a mate there's an intimacy to
insults and language and taking the piss
out of each other there's an intimacy to
that that's because it's it's family
it's it's friendship it's uh it's a
connection and I think language is so
nuanced like if you if you just take the
if you take the humor out of it it's you
know you're just being brutal but the
humor like it's sort of like we love
each other so much that we can trade
blows and that doesn't even matter it's
something like that it's the it's the uh
it's I suppose it gets to that thing of
you know uh love is unconditional uh
friendship isn't so it kind of gets to a
thing of going listen if you if you love
each other you can you can sort of take
this and it's fine and the badge of
honor of being able to take a joke
sometimes the worst thing you could say
about some of the British is that you
can't take a joke yeah yeah well it's in
it's fun being a Canadian in
relationship to Comedy because we I
watched a fair bit of British comedy
when I grew up I love Monty Python which
I discovered when I was 12 and I just I
thought it was actually a circus show
when I first watched it and I thought
what the hell is this and then my dad
turned out to like it too which I
thought was extremely bizarre and so
what I loved about the British Brit
comedy in particular I think this is
characteristic of your culture is that
British comedians tend to be extremely
self-deprecating and British satire is
like that too it's they're after
themselves a lot and you know Americans
really didn't have a great hand for
satire I didn't think until the Simpsons
came along that was the first truly
self-satilical satirical comedy that I'd
seen coming out of the U.S well I guess
or Lenny Bruce or any of those kind of
greats would have been a huge influence
of that I mean you know the Simpsons
didn't come out of nowhere I mean
standing on the shoulder of giants as is
always the way with comedy you know
we're kind of part of a very proud
tradition that goes back through uh
variety and Court jesters and tricks to
Gods we're part of that tradition where
outside looking in we're we're slightly
other I mean it's that thing of you know
comedians in a room of 3000 people I'll
be the one person facing the wrong way
that kind of sums us up as a group yeah
well that's that's kind of the position
of artists in general you know because
artists tend to be outside the what you
say the traditional competence
hierarchies they're they're viewers from
the outside and observers and so they're
they're not in the hierarchy in some
sense and I do think that that's true of
Comedians and the fact that the jester
is the only person that can tell the
king the truth is extremely interesting
and also it's interesting that the king
who can't tolerated his gesture has
become a tyrant that's a way of telling
yeah it's a great story about The Great
Wall of China do you know that story
when the emperor's building the Great
Wall I mean it nearly backcropped the
kingdom the Great Wall of China and the
plan was to paint it red that was always
the plan we're going to paint it we're
painting it red and the jester made so
many jokes about painting it and how it
would bankrupt them and how it would
destroy the kingdom and made all the
jokes the the emperor changed his mind
except I mean I need to paint it it's
crazy uh but it's an interesting kind of
thing of like the the effect that sort
of speaking truth to power is not an
easy thing to do it's much easier to get
your point across if everyone's laughing
yeah that's for sure well I also thought
when I was lecturing when I was at
Harvard I was lecturing about the most
serious things I could think of and it
was usually about
totalitarianism and atrocity like really
dark things and this thought always came
in my mind it was like look if you
really mastered this you wouldn't be so
dead serious about it you'd be able to
do it with a light touch like with a bit
of comedy and I thought Jesus how can
that possibly be true given the topics
that I'm addressing but I've certainly
come to realize that I'm at my best as a
lecturer when I can when I'm not so dead
serious and maybe possessed by a certain
amount of anger when I can leave in what
I'm saying with jokes I'm in the right
place then well I mean the audience
loves that I mean but in the macro and
the micro because I mean if you look at
totalitarian States not fame for their
sense of humor I mean they're cabarets
yeah they're not funny well but Cabaret
is really interesting as a as a piece
because the idea of the Cabaret clubs in
Germany were shut down because they
realized you can't hate someone you're
laughing with and laughter builds a
bridge it's it's it's tough to be uh
racist when you're laughing with a
comedian from a different ethnicity it's
it really does kind of it makes Bonds in
society and it you know joins things up
and you know Russell Peters really has
done that well I think
yeah the idea that you kind of you bring
lots of different people together and
sort of and share that common experience
um so yeah I think there's there's
something in in you know and actually
when you're when you're doing a lecture
about something incredibly serious to to
be able to make a point about something
and to be funny about it is
it's kind of magnificent because it
shows uh confidence and competency and
being able to be a little bit
self-deprecating and taking oneself too
seriously it's kind of it's all to the
good
yeah well it's a mark of transcendence I
think in some part right because you
know if you do something stupid and then
you laugh at yourself it's like
simultaneously you're the fool but
you're also the thing that can look at
the fool and say well I'm a fool but I
can do better and I don't have to take
that
yeah isn't there something with life
with you know if you look at the the
Mental Health crisis that's going on
globally at the moment it's about
perspective you know comedy offers
perspective in a way that I think is
incredibly profound uh and meaningful to
me because you look at you know what
suicides like the extreme example right
so suicide is the is the uh is a symptom
of depression and depression is it's
it's basically suicide is the the
permanent solution to a temporary
problem
and comedy is very good at lending
perspective and going look this is let's
step back from this we all yeah and the
question is where are you stepping back
to do you think like if you make a joke
about an extremely serious subject you
know and you're stepping back somewhere
right and you're sharing that with the
audience and they go there too where is
it do you think they keep it going when
you step back I think it's processing I
think there's a sense in which when we
joke about something we're taking
something that's uh too horrific to talk
about to to acknowledge and we're we're
making it okay so that theory of benign
violation on Comedy comes up the idea
that you go we're taking things that are
violations in our culture in our world
and we're making them benign by laughing
about them we're taking away their power
so if you imagine that the Venn diagram
of violations and we're making them
benign and joking about them and
processing that thought it's a very
important part of our because so much of
life is uh is is terrible and so much of
our culture is you know
um assuming obviously you know it is uh
the obstacation of Decay that's the
phrase isn't it it's the we're trying to
hide death we're trying to not think
about mortality that idea or to
transcend it or to transcend it you know
it's I don't think comedy is denial I
think it's genuine Transcendence and you
know that idea that you take away
someone's power with laughter it's like
that's actually literally true when I
used to work out I had a couple of
friends I worked out with a lot and they
were pretty damn funny and one of the
things we would do when we were bench
pressing and sometimes heavyweights is
make the guy laugh and you cannot exert
muscular Force when you're laughing and
that's where the phrase sort of collapse
into laughter comes so that's really
interesting physiologically puts in the
book about what happens in Vegas stays
in the Vegas now what happens to you
from a physiological point of view when
you laugh is I think fascinating I mean
it's really I like to think of myself as
a as a drug dealer
I'm a drug dealer but the drugs are
already on the audience
this is I'm never going to get taken by
by uh the the the the police because I'm
releasing endorphins but you've got the
endorphins on you you're getting it and
dopamine why because dopamine mediates
positive emotion and so and and all the
cocaine and and the drugs the
psychomotor stimulants are very potent
dopamine releases and so it's literally
the case that when you laugh and
facilitate positive emotion you are
activating that circuit without harm
right and it's the without harm yeah and
I sort of view uh you know watching
things on screens as fentanyl it's a
it's a substitute it's not the real
thing you need the real thing
when you're watching on the screen it's
like that those drugs are being cut up
someone stepped on that cocaine you need
the pure thing of like being in a room
with other people that's where you
release it you don't laugh in the same
way when you're watching your favorite
you know if you see Monty Python on a
screen you laugh but if you go and see
them live if you go you know they did
that talk show it's a different order of
laughter you're falling about it's a
it's and you you know as you say you
collapse into laughter you you have fits
of laughter you yes yeah you know what
it does for the vagus nerve it tells
your body you can digest your food it
calms you it's it's it's perfect and
it's a I think it's a necessary part of
it yeah do you have any idea what the
movement of the abdomen that's
associated with laughter does
physiologically yeah I mean I've uh I
mean I've kind of looked into it I
wouldn't be the expert on that but the
idea that it does allow you to uh digest
and to process in a way that's uh you
know very very beneficial it doesn't
have any negative effects of it if you
could buy a drone that did what laughter
did with the amount of side effects that
laughter has which is literally none
it's it would be the perfect drug
yeah so that that idea about about
having to be there with the people
that's interesting too because I'm going
back on tour I did a tour in 2018 and I
think it's all just about as many
tickets as yours by the way haha and so
um anyhow I'm going back next year and
I'm wondering why I'm doing it because I
could just do YouTube videos and you
know they're pretty effective and I
could just sit here and do them and
they're pretty fun but I really want to
do it I really find it ridiculously
exciting and part of it is the feedback
from the audience right that there's an
I get informed by that in a way it's
more than that you're giving people an
experience because I I you never forget
who you saw lime you never forget who
you saw like you you know no no one goes
the Rolling Stones did I see them live
or not I can't remember but a YouTube
video did I see that YouTube video or
not I don't I don't know yeah maybe
maybe I watched it maybe I didn't but
going to something live going it's also
the thing that you're doing the high
before the high the people that will buy
tickets to the show they buy tickets to
a comedy show that buy tickets to a
lecture and they go right I'm gonna go
out I'm gonna I'm gonna laugh a lot or
I'm going to be stimulated I'm buying
into this this is this defines me this
is my sense of humor this is my kind of
speaker I'm gonna buy into it I'm gonna
go there I'm gonna be with my tribe for
the evening other people that you know
everyone has something in common in that
room when they come and see you
everything has has someone in common
when it comes to me it's that sense of
humor like we don't have anything else
in common there's people from all
different walks of life in my audience
there's people from 16 to 90 in the
crowd and they all have something in
common for that for that one evening
we've created a village and that's a
very very special very powerful thing uh
to let people be part of that and sure
you could just stick it on YouTube and
put it on send and that's that's a
facsimile and it's a pretty good fact
simile in the world that we live in and
it's been a Lifeline the last 18 months
for people but but really giving them
that experience is very special and also
you have to kind of limit that a little
bit because actually you can't really
play the Arenas I mean you could but it
becomes a different thing in the Arenas
what what the sort of thing you do in
arenas becomes kind of uh Tony Robbins
event and then it's all it's it's at a
different frequency it becomes about
genuing people up rather than connecting
you know this yeah we did I did make a
distinction between the the sorry
there's a distinction there's Comics you
go
to laugh with and there's Comics you go
to see
sometimes you get a comedian where
people love them so much they don't
really care about the jokes they just
want to be in a room with them you know
it's that thing Dave Chappelle is that
Dave Chappelle I mean
he's a good Storyteller right yeah I
played with Dave last week in in London
he was over in London doing shows and I
uh myself and Jeff Ross uh opened for
him uh it was pretty fun it was a good
scene yeah I think there is a sense of
kind of uh
hero worship and wanting to be in the
room and and there being something uh I
think you know George Carlin probably
had it as well that kind of almost
um preacher feel is really interesting
that people are drawn to that in a
secular World we're looking for people
to uh yeah Rogan Rogan has some of that
I would say yeah I think he's got a lot
of that yeah yeah John mullini he's got
more of that kind of one line thing but
he's got an interesting Persona I don't
know how much that's his true character
you know he's kind of like this 1950s
advertising executive mid Middle America
suburbs nerd and he plays on that real
well it's interesting it's you can't
really convince people you're not what
they assume you are you know John
Mulaney I know he's had some some issues
recently much more complex than
interesting character than people would
maybe give him credit off them I'd say
the same about Theo Vaughn Theo plays
this bumbling Southern here because he's
a very very smart man he's a smart guy
yeah it's it's often the way that you go
it's there's two things in life isn't it
there's and I write about this a lot in
the book there's you have to know who
you are right that's the first big
journey in life is finding out who you
are what you're about what your skills
are what your Edge is in life what do
you do best not better than anyone in
the world but what do you do and that's
not marketing work at Shell uh
definitely not definitely not so it's
that thing like you have to find out who
you are but it's also important as a
duality because you have to find out how
you're perceived in the world as well
what do people think you are people look
at me and they don't see uh they don't
see an immigrant they don't see someone
that's dyslexic they see they see a very
confident British man somewhere between
Hugh Grant and Mr Bean right so they've
seen that so you better know how you're
perceived in the world and you also
Better Know Who You Are
authentically and I think having both of
those things it's very important kind of
armor for going out to the world I mean
I did your um before coming on this
today I did the your understanding
yourself uh oh you did understand myself
well yeah so tell me what your
personality is like well let me guess
you're extroverted as hell you're
probably pretty disagreeable I don't
imagine you're that conscientious
because it's hard to be conscientious
you're high in openness
97th percentile in uh in conscientious
uh yeah incredibly can't judges but the
thing I mean without getting into the
horoscope of the everyone's fascinated
by themselves I do find it like it's an
incredibly useful tool because you go
well most people are looking that's the
there's two great adventures in life
there's finding your purpose and then
there's pursuing it and most people
don't get to do either my book really is
about uh trying to share that so I did
the autobiography but I wanted it to be
I wanted to be half about me and half
about you and half about like what are
the beliefs that you have to have in
order to pursue that Journey what are
the good questions to ask yourself what
what's the right way and I found that
and I knew I was talking to you today so
I thought well I'll I'll be a good
student I'll do a little bit of research
and did that and I just thought yeah are
you married are you married I've just
just had our first kid we've been
together 21 years a nice story you know
if you do that understand myself and she
does it it will generate a report about
your differences and similarities and
where you're likely to misunderstand
each other and why so all she has to do
is sign up and do it and then you can
link your accounts and it'll generate
this third report
yeah it's really I did it with my wife
recently and it was really useful does
it put you in touch with a lawyer or do
you have to find your own
yeah well that's a feature we should add
like a value-added feature we can get
some lawyers to pay for that if it comes
up then it's really you're not a great
match it should just come up of like I
love that thing in do you ever read that
researcher at the love lab do you ever
read his stuff
are you talking about the research and
what predicts divorce yeah you mean eye
rolling for example which yeah
divorce with 95 accuracy yeah and he
could do it within five minutes we often
do it with couples over dinner where
we've got myself and Carolina put it
right 100 of the time where it's like if
someone displays contempt for their
partner it is over it's gone hey
so let's talk about that for a sec how
about if we all display contempt for our
political opponents does that make it
over too I think I think maybe it does I
think there's a there's a there's a
sense in which uh political parties now
have become like sports teams you you
blindly follow left or right blue or red
whatever your team is and you become
entrenched in our culture people talk
about Echo Chambers it's amplifiers the
left have moved to the left the right
have moved to the right and there's a
couple of liberals left in the middle
going well we need the problem with the
middle the center ground is it's not
exciting
I want that to be kind of you know I
want to be a radical moderate but it's
such a well that's what I've been trying
to do with responsibility you know and
to to to to uh about disability needs
crisis management because responsibility
sounds boring but it's incredibly
empowering like if you take
responsibility like it like no one ever
like when you when you when you win
something you never go I'm responsible
for this but you go actually
responsibility is about the Nexus of
control is within you
it's the it's the idea that you go wrong
I'm in charge of this now so that's
really the story of the early part of my
life was about going taking my uh taking
my life and actually leading my life as
opposed to just letting things happen
yeah let's talk about that so you you
you graduated and then you went worked
as a marketer for Shell but you didn't
like that and then you took a sideways
okay well please tell that story I
didn't make any decisions in my life
until I was about 25.
why did you do the things you did if you
weren't making decisions I did the best
next thing so when you're 16 you decide
to stay you can get a job or you can
stay on that school the best thing to do
is to stay at school and the best thing
to do is to try and pass those exams try
and go to the best university you can so
I went to Cambridge because that was the
best one I could think of and so I went
there and I got the best degree I could
and then at the end of that you got the
best job that you could so far I've not
made any decisions it's been about it's
been what's presented to you and the
next step a very well-worn path yeah a
typical kind of conservative path yeah
and then we'll see since you know so so
then the idea of being kind of in your
mid-20s and going well hang on Whose
life am I leading where's this going and
you can see because it's such a
well-worn path you can see into the
future and go well actually I know
exactly who I'm going to be in 10 years
time in five years time and 15 years
time but whatever the time period is by
looking at someone ahead of you on that
Rogue and then going no I don't want
that I want life to be an adventure I
want to find a purpose I want to find
something special for me I don't think
there's anything special about me I
don't think anything magical happened I
think I was exposed to uh for one of a
better phrase self-help
um NLP and cognitive behavioral therapy
at the right age when I was ready to go
right that's for me I'm going to be like
that person so something as simple as a
personality test something as as
diverting as it's like kind of I suppose
a a a rationalist horoscope is such a
powerful thing because the more you get
to know yourself through doing that
stuff the better able you are to go
right what's my Edge what am I bringing
to the party in life what do I do better
than anyone else what am I going to
devote my life to because you make your
own luck it's your your Edge what you do
best your hard work plus time that's
your luck we're all of us just buying
lottery tickets nothing's guaranteed but
if you want it to kind of pay off you're
going right can I put everything into
this it's gonna pay out eventually what
do you mean by everything when you say
that and because you made this shift
into comedy it looked like it was pretty
sudden and pretty successful pretty soon
so that's a very weird thing to do and a
very weird thing to do successfully so
what do you mean you do everything
success success came later but I think
being all in when you find it being all
in is quite important
so finding comedy for me it felt like
suddenly I arrived in a space where work
is more fun than fun so I was working
300 nights a year and it didn't feel
like anything I we both had a similar
experience actually I know a little bit
about you uh in our mid-20s of giving up
alcohol because work was more important
and it reminds me that I I I'm of the
opinion that the opposite of addiction
isn't sobriety its purpose
hey the clinical literature on that is
crystal clear the only reliable
treatment for alcoholism that's ever
been discovered is spiritual
transformation that's it and every even
the hard-nosed researchers know that and
that's very tightly akin to this notion
of pursuing something meaningful yeah
but I think that could be expanded in a
very meaningful way because you you go
all purpose doesn't need to have
a spiritual element to them and I think
it does because it's about your life's
meaning and your journey that might be
the spirit of laughter you know
yeah I think so and then you know that
certainly I feel that the the you know
the more I read about tricks to Gods the
more you think oh that's a very
interesting position in society yeah
he's the precursor to the Savior the
trickster is always the precursor to the
Savior yeah John the Baptist was the was
the trickster right yeah yeah Christ's
full I don't know if he told jokes
though and of course my head will end up
on a plate
um yeah it's it's a it's an interesting
thing I mean I wanted the book to be
quiet I'm quite sort of passionate about
it the idea that I'm not going to book
to be funny and engaging and my story
but I also wanted it to be look there's
the hero's journey I wanted it to be to
have the tools in there for someone else
to go I'm not interested in comedy at
all but I can see how I could do my
thing and if I believed the same things
what would happen for me because your
beliefs become everything and not not
your beliefs in terms of your spiritual
beliefs per se but the the assumptions
we make about what we can and what we
can't do they're almost I don't know
what you call them the Unseen beliefs
about well I'm not the kind of person
that does that or I'm not the sort of
person that would do this or I'm not the
kind of person yeah I told my my niece
phoned me the other day she wanted to
talk to me she's 17 I believe and she
just applied to University and she was
happy to share the news of her
acceptance to a couple of Institutions
and we had a good conversation about the
fact that you know when you leave to
University if you leave home one thing
that can happen to you is that you can
be a new person you can decide what
garbage and wreckage you're going to
leave behind and not drag with you and
you can decide who you're going to be
and what kind of friends you want and if
you're lucky in life you get a few
chances to do that
you're preaching to the choir here I was
16 and I changed schools through
happenstance uh we moved house and I
changed schools for what we would call
Sixth forms so for the last two years
and you become acutely aware that you
are a story you tell yourself that you
can and you can choose to kind of be I
was quite a terrible way in my first
school I got in a lot of trouble and
then I changed I can't believe that and
then but in my second school I kind of
went no I just I'll be academic and I'll
do well and I'll go to a good University
and then at the University you you can
kind of you reinvent yourself I mean the
cliche really of finding yourself is
travel
and you go especially if you go on your
own
um which is probably easier for young
men in this day and age than young women
but your trip to travel on your own in
Southeast Asia or something and you you
kind of you meet new people and you try
on different hats and
hey I got something cool to tell you
about that don't if you'd be interested
well I read at one point Jung's
description of the uh maze in the
charter Cathedral and in the Maze you
you enter on one side and then you
Traverse the entire circle and that's
equivalent to traversing the globe and
the Maze is set out so that you walk all
four quadrants and then you come to the
center so then you're at the center if
you walk all four quadrants now what
happens when you go somewhere new is two
things is one is you learn new things so
you pull in new information and that
enriches you but here's something that's
even cooler and it's related at a deep
level to the psychobiology of play and
pretend
so if you go somewhere new that requires
you to be someone other than you were
new genes turn on in your nervous system
and code for new proteins it turns on
biological potential that isn't in fact
implicit inside you and builds you into
a new creature and so the idea behind
that traversing the circle which is an
equivalent to a pilgrimage is that if
you go all places you get to the center
of things because you turn everything in
yourself on by doing that and that's the
same thing you're doing in some sense
when you're listening to your audience
so intensely and finding out what they
appreciate and what's funny right you're
you're you're visiting these new domains
and and that transforms you into
something well something they want and
something you want if you're lucky if
you're careful and you're lucky I find
it a fascinating kind of you know I mean
travel is obviously I sort of think the
nature nurture thing comes into it
because I think a lot of people assume
like nature nurture it's the debate is
pointless because
is very important but there's nothing I
can do about nature that's the cards
I've been dealt right so other than a
little bit of plastic surgery nose job
yeah nose job man hair transplant yeah
yeah yeah yeah those are pretty nice
teeth for an Englishman thank you uh
thank you thank you to my audience
you've paid for it
um the but the idea that you go look
you've got your nature that's the cards
you're dealt you make the best of that
that's nurture is making the best of
that the idea that I think a lot of
people have the idea that nurture
finishes very early it's about parental
nurturing and you know when you're 18
you're finished but the idea of nurture
as a lifelong Pursuit and you can't
really beat your environment so it's
important you're in an environment I
mean the environment in a kind of
literal sense of going not just where
you are but who you're with is your
environment so it's just around yourself
with people where and I think we're all
quite narcissistic I think I like who I
am when I'm with certain people I like
being a father I like who I am yeah but
that might not be narcissistic that
might be the like if you love being a
father you have a great relationship
with your children how do you it's
perfectly reasonable for you to assume
that that's when you are your best self
I thought that when I was a father I
love being with my kids and well it's a
great relationship even that thing of
like the conversations that you have
that the friends you choose to go to
dinner for the work environment I
remember arriving in the world of Comedy
age 25 and just thinking well this is I
like who I am here this is fun right
right there's a there's a there's a
spirit of possibility here that I hadn't
experienced before so success happened
very early on within that world not in
terms of financial gains or status
because sort of who cares that's for
someone else that's very external that
measure of success but the idea of like
a happiness
uh came out of that that was that was
transformational uh just in terms of my
my whole way of being changed and I
think uh you know happiness is it's one
of those words that's become uh
conflated in in the book I'm sort of
Obsessed by
the accuracy of language
and how we we that's a good thing if
you're writing a book yeah but but that
you know that the idea that I I talk
about
is being sad I wasn't depressed
I was sad and there's a huge difference
because depression is about serotonin
levels and chemical imbalance that
balance in your mind it's a very serious
disease with very serious repercussions
suicide being the most serious side of
uh symptom
sadness is about circumstance sadness is
fantastic sadness just means you don't
like things as they are well things are
going to change you can you know you're
you're not now and you're a virgin yeah
well you're going to change one of the
things I did constantly as a therapist
so this is part of the cognitive
behavioral process let's say it's
collaborative empiricism it's like okay
your mood isn't good but there's some
variation in it so what you're going to
do for the next week is you're going to
watch yourself like you don't know who
you are and you're gonna see if you can
identify times when you're not so sad
and then see if you can figure out like
where those where you are what you're
doing what you're thinking why are you
not sad then yeah yeah and then can you
do more of that could you do more of
that well it's interesting I mean again
I talk about this in in the book I
wouldn't have the same qualification as
you but the my cure for that is Flow
State get into a flow State get to a
state where you're not aware of the
passage of time yeah yeah that's a
marker that's a weird marker that one
that you're out then you know that's way
that's where you're outside the domain
of mortality concerns at that point too
right because that weight of mortality
that weighs upon us is integrity linked
with consciousness of time and in that
flow state that disappears and that
means in some sense you're United with
eternity in those flow States it's not a
trivial thing no it's it's hugely
important I read a fabulous thing on I
mean I think sport is is often where
people you know if you're playing tennis
or whatever that happens to be my sport
but you would you go I'm not aware of
how long I've been doing this this has
been just a just a pleasure and I've
been so focused taking your conscious
mind and giving it something to do so
that your subconscious can relax is I
think I'm not I'm not great with
meditation but I quite doing I quite
like doing Lego puzzles uh with with my
other half because you go yeah I'm just
gonna I'm just gonna get busy get all
that busy so that you can then relax you
know I I suffer yeah I talked to I
talked to Sam Harris about that a fair
bit a couple of weeks ago because he has
this meditation app that he's being
everybody's waking up I think is
fantastic but I tend to listen to the
talks on waking up rather than doing the
meditations because it always seems uh I
don't know what that is about me but it
always feels like doing the meditations
is I'm not am I doing this right am I am
I quite getting it I should go back and
investigate more but it's uh well you
know you have that out that you already
described too though that because you're
dead and you're successful yeah
absolutely but you know we we discussed
the possibility you get in that worried
state where you're possessed by your by
your propositional thoughts about gloom
and doom and all that's running around
in your head and to get out of that into
a different state is actually
psychophysiologically rejuvenating I
think I've got a I've got quite positive
in the book as well attitude towards I
suffer anxiety more than depression I
think a lot of people do
um and for me I try and see it as the as
the negative side of creativity the idea
that all of the good things that have
happened to me have happened through uh
creativity and be open to the Muse but
also once you open those Gates there's
an anxiety that can come in as well your
racing mind might get you a joke very
quickly on the spot but it also might
result in you waking up at five in the
morning with a panic attack and I think
sometimes seeing the negative things in
life for what they are are part of the
whole is is very valuable kind of make
your peace with
um what what you know what life is
there's it's like if you're if you're a
standard comedian there's a lot of
travel there's going to be a lot of
planes and Trains and Automobiles and
travel you're going on a concert tour
making your piece without going yeah
that's part of the thing that I'm loving
doing this is part of the whole there's
you can't just have that bit you have to
take it all well that's also part of the
problem with Envy you know when people
compare themselves to other people they
say well I really wish what that son of
a had and that kind of malevolence
often comes along with it
here's a point about envy that I make in
my book I make a very clear distinction
I suppose you could have it either way
on the on the um on the uh etymology of
the word but uh for me it's envy and
jealousy are very different for me
jealousy is about I don't want him to
have that I'm jealous of what they have
but I don't necessarily want that myself
Envy I think could be a very positive
thing in one's life because Envy for me
it strikes me that the only question
that really matters in life in any given
situation is what do you want
it's the most profound meaningful
question at every level whether you're
looking at a menu in a restaurant or
trying to decide what to do with your
life what do you want and envy often
gives you very accurate pointers yeah
because you look at someone else you
read someone else's book let's say from
your perspective you might read someone
else's book on psychology and you might
go that guy absolutely nailed it I can't
believe how good that is and it Spurs
you on to work harder to say well I need
to be more succinct in my language and I
need to clarify better or for me I might
watch someone's comedy special and just
go oh that blew my mind what they did I
gotta get better at this I'm going to
break down what they did and I'm going
to get better at it so Envy I think can
be powerful the idea of not wanting
someone else you know comparison is the
thief of joy uh is is one of my favorite
quotes and it just it 100 of the time it
kills it as soon as you look in
someone's having more fun than you
somewhere
that Envy you know that's interesting to
use that dark that dark emotion in some
sense as a guide to what you actually
value so if you notice what your envious
of then you can tell what you actually
value even what you want that willing
yes
I've got that lovely uh first people
story in the book about the uh the white
wolf and the black wolf
um you know that story right yeah I
don't think so so there's a there's a
there's a black wolf and a white wolf
and they represent uh good and bad I
mean you know the the uh the first
peoples
and they say so which wolf are you gonna
feed
and and the kind of the the the the
colonial white man's uh retelling of the
story was what you feed the white wolf
you feed the good wolf but if you only
feed
the good wolf
there's actually a downside because the
the the the Dark Wolf the black wolf
doesn't just disappear he's waiting
around every corner to attack
so wait waiting yeah you also might need
him to scare off other Wolves yeah so
that idea of going well look actually
you feed them you feed them both and you
kind of you use that the darker things
you turn to good you said well something
as negative potentially as Envy it could
be an incredibly powerful force in your
life if it tells you what you want and
when I say what you want it's like I'm
gonna sound like an old hippie here but
I genuinely on that question of
um what do you want I think wishing
wells work
but they work way before people think
they work the the magic wish not so much
but knowing what to wish for is
everything you'd be amazed how many
people that go to a wishing well and
they wish for a million pounds
she's like it's like they're wishing for
a token they don't know what they want
they're putting off answering the
question what's the thing you really
want and and it's it's like it's that's
so fundamental to happiness in life and
to finding your purpose finding what is
that thing at the base level that you
want because knocking the door will open
asking you will receive yeah that has
very much to do with specifying and
admitting to yourself and then actually
working towards what it is you actually
want so many people
that I wanted to be a comedian I
remember telling people that I want to
be a stand-up comedian I remember
calling my first Edinburgh show when I
first did a show barefaced ambition
because I was very I want this to be my
life I want to do this I want to pursue
it I want to be successful at it I want
this to be who I am I want this this is
an identity level Pursuit for me
and the universe conspired to help me it
felt like it felt like everything was
once you tell people that I'm going to
do this it was like I felt like okay
everything's pointing in the right
direction there was a real uh a a
congruency to who I was well you
definitely you definitely sound like
you're happy now there's no doubt about
that so thank you so yeah so well you
had this job that you took after you
graduated from University and it was a
good you know solid stable job and so
why didn't that work for you and when
did you know that you might be funny and
you know not in the peculiar way
obviously but uh
I hadn't written a joke until I was 25 I
was like a fan of Comedy but I hadn't
written a joke I had not been in school
plays particularly I've not taken an
interest in comedy above and beyond
being a consumer I was about 25 and I
suddenly kind of went well this is my my
age the thing that I'm good at is
talking to people the thing that I'm
good at is is getting ideas across and
making people laugh was such an
important part of my life
um I trace it back to my mother I trace
it back to she had an extraordinary
laugh
she was a very funny Irish woman uh uh
had a lovely tone of phrase and there
was a high value put on making people
laugh in our house because could you
make her laugh yeah it wasn't a
particularly happy home but and and I
think if you're talking to comedians I
think the question to ask
is people often people ask about you
know depression and comedians because
the tears the clown thing is so it's
such a delicious irony why wouldn't you
ask about that but actually I think the
question to ask that's more interesting
is which of your parents was sick
I think comedians often have to make
things okay
within their family
and I certainly had that experience and
then and then it was it was about kind
of when you obviously your your life is
understood backwards it's lived forwards
and it's it's understood in the rear
view but looking back it was it was
obvious of course that's that's what
you're going to be good at you're good
at you know within friendship groups
within family and making people laugh at
making things okay
okay so you knew that you knew that
about yourself that you could make your
friends laugh your family life and all
you said also make things okay is that
peacemaking or without humor I think
peacemaking was was part of what what I
view humor as I think it's a it's a a
methodology for making things okay for
for lightening the mood for uh you know
I it for me it's kind of a Panacea I
mean I'm I'm ultimately I'm
self-medicating with you
so how in the world did you come about
the decision to leave your job and and
you also mentioned cognitive behavior
therapy in there that that you did
something that that yeah
what did uh actually when you worked for
a large company like ciao there's a
um there's a training budget every year
that they're assigned to their South
efforts so if you work on the oil rigs
it's all health and safety training I
was working in a fancy office in central
London so there's no need for any health
and safety stuff it's all fine the most
dangerous thing was the coffee in the
coffee machine so for me I could go and
do with that kind of those courses in
those days that they gave us I went and
did some NLP training with a guy you
know one of these kind of corporate away
day things and it got exposed to NLP and
just went oh this is phenomenal I'd lost
my religious faith on a trip to
um uh Israel some ironically the scales
had fallen from my eyes and I kind of
went well if I'm right about
Christianity everyone else is wrong that
fundamental kind of
um it's kind of a tiny Pebble in my shoe
had become a boulder and I just couldn't
live with it anymore and I I slowly over
about a year-long period lost my faith
and then I found NLP and I I kind of
thought I basically latched onto another
belief structure and the idea that the
map is not the territory the idea there
um who who how you perceive the world is
how the world is we see the world not as
it is but how we are
the idea that you know
um I suppose disposition is more
important in position
and it's very difficult to change your
disposition but it's so much easier than
changing the world and I kind of I
suddenly
everything through being exposed to that
became possible but the possibilities
became like well fundamentally my belief
became anything anyone else can do I can
do
and that's incredibly empowering and
it's scary and you're suddenly not
leading your life for the next for the
for the afterlife you I mean I still got
a huge belief in the next life but not
the afterlife the Precision of that
phrase I think the the allegories of
religion I still enjoy
but I just don't I don't believe them
literally
so the idea of going now is it next life
of course there's a next life you move
through phases
um I'm a father now and I I'm I'm you
know in my late 40s I'm a very different
person than the person that started on
this road 25 years ago to being a
comedian I you know there's every
molecule in my body has changed of
course I'm a different person there's
there's a next life literally but but
the afterlife it struck me that the
afterlife was a way of the ultimate in
procrastination
and it struck me that religious belief
was very good for the try not great for
the individual
and in our society at the moment maybe
there's a it's it's an interesting thing
going on at the moment where we've the
pendulum has swung too far to the
individual and there's not enough tribal
thinking going on
that's an awful lot to unpack there
What specifically so you said you moved
from Christianity and you moved into a
psychotherapeutic realm in some sense
and that opened up all sorts of
possibilities for it you started to
realize that you had been hindered by
your own presumptions some of them
unexamined about who you were and what
you should be doing how did your fat did
you have family around at that time like
are you constrained in your choices in
some sense or not I think I was a little
bit constrained by a sense of Duty that
was I'm not sure whether that was real
or imagined I think very often it's
that's one of the assumptions you make
about what I should do to be a dutiful
son uh that my mother died around the
same time and that was weirdly quite
sort of I was quite I believe what
psychotherapists would call enmesh had a
very close
um sort of a a substitute partner from
my mother group you know very close you
could argue too close so when she died
that was
um
crippling for me you know the grief was
was was very overpowering but also freed
me up to go the thing that I had feared
as a child the the uh philosopher of of
the key parent had happened the worst
thing had happened and I you kind of
look around you're still standing and
you go you know what are the lessons
from that we'll go and live your life
the best you can make you know suddenly
there was a sense of urgency to my life
that this is you know you get one life
mortality became a very real thing
through grief the idea that this is the
only chance you get you have to make
good honor this is uh right you know
that's kind of the black wolf and the
white wolf there is you know the white
wolf you might think well that's the
meaning that you found in this Pursuit
but you're also chased by the fact that
you realized the fragility and shortness
of life and it's definitely better to be
if you're going somewhere it's better to
be running from something and running
towards something you're a lot more
motivated then yeah yeah I felt like it
was a I felt incredibly old when I was
25 and working in an oil company I felt
as old as I've ever felt and then the
next year I was suddenly in this other
world where I felt like a teenager again
and I kind of have done since it felt
very it's it's uh it's you know I I
don't view atheism as as a
um a cold dry academic uh Pursuit I view
it as a as kind of an empowering Rush of
Blood to the Head an incredible uh sense
of responsibility uh was was
overwhelming the idea that you you were
responsible for your life and at some
point you you have that associated with
the atheism that realization I think it
was the the idea that you you um you
weren't living for the afterlife you
were living for this one because you
were you were focused on uh making this
like you were responsible for making
this life as as good as it could be you
you weren't waiting at the analogy to
hippie you weren't waiting to be brought
flowers you were planting your own
garden you're responsible for this you
better make this work for you so that
that felt to me like a lot of
responsibility but also great this is
going to be so in that transformation I
believe heightened the sense of the
significance of your life for you by by
forcing you in some sense to realize
well how how Irreplaceable it was and
how time limited it was that also didn't
undermine you by the sounds of it I
genuinely felt like I was waking up I
genuinely felt like I was in a bit of
days uh like the the scales have been
lifted I've been I've been kind of
wading through treacle
in my early 20s like post college that
kind of trying to hold on to that
previous life like you know talk about
they're talking about next lives there
was you know University was you know a
blast you know had a lot of fun a lot of
drinking great and then you leave and
suddenly you're in the real world and
it's just I didn't like it I didn't like
where I was in it I didn't find it I
hadn't found a purpose so it's kind of
you know there's a lot of trudgery and I
hadn't found that thing and then
suddenly I found this incredibly
privileged position where work was more
fun than fun so I could put everything
into it
so on that personality test were you
high in openness to experience yeah how
high remember
and you're 98 in conscientiousness as
well you said something like that I
think so yeah okay so that's that makes
you kind of a strange person politically
because you've got the conscientiousness
of someone who's conservative and that
would maybe account for your dutifulness
you know that initial presumption about
duty but openness runs in some ways
contrary to that that's that that's the
Wellspring of creativity and so maybe
that job at Shell was good for duty but
not for you know the that Jester and
artist I'm a radical moderate is what I
am I'm like a classic kind of liberal uh
thinker you know the the
um I I I guess that's where I am so
right in the middle thing so political
parties for me sort of aren't really the
thing it's it's uh I don't find them
particular I don't think it's a it's a
they're not useful I think it's it
strikes me that being a member of a
political party now is like ordering
from a set menu in a Chinese restaurant
you know you all you order from the set
menu maybe the first time you go but as
soon as you know what you're talking
about you kind of you think different
things on different issues I don't agree
with anyone about everything
how did you score on agreeableness do
you remember
um I think I was pretty high I'm gonna
look I've got it here I've got it on my
phone I tell you how agreeable I am I
think you're right all right I think it
was I was quite extreme I was um I was
saying
yeah I'm curious about that in
relationship to humor because you know
comedians are often blunt and you have a
real Edge to your humor I mean it can
get pretty dark and and it and there is
a real element in your in your comedy of
of
well there's provocation I mean that's
not that unique I suppose comedians do a
fair bit of that but
maybe everyone should do this test
before they get uh agreeableness no I
was typical typical agreeableness and
did it split into politeness do you have
the split there for politeness and
compassion I think it had uh uh yes uh I
think I had uh more
more compassion and politeness yeah yeah
well I'm not the most politic guys well
it's not that easy to be a polite
comedian yeah compassion very high
politeness very low yeah okay okay
very high
um industriousness very high I mean it's
a pleasure to take this test orderliness
hi
um uh
extraversion exceptionally High yeah
it's that particular both enthusiasm and
assertiveness
enthusiasm very high assertiveness
exceptionally High uh neuroticism
exceptionally low
oh that's how nice for you that's yeah
if you have to have one temperamental
gift that might be the one to wish for
yeah withdrawal very low uh volatility
exceptionally like actually the
listeners of this can I recommend you I
think it's like 10 bucks or something
but going and doing this it's
understanding myself.com I must say it's
a very pleasant half hour going and
doing it and answering your questions
and then to understand myself.com just
to clarify just it's it's a it's a
really interesting kind of process
because you go well no matter what kind
of what comes out you can kind of agree
with it or disagree with it whatever but
it's it's a very nice thing to kind of
go and and kind of and says okay that
seems that seems about right that seems
yeah well it's also interesting to know
that you know that is how you are in
some sense and other people are actually
different than that
they're actually different and so
they're like an extrovert and an
introvert have a certain amount of
trouble in a relationship because the
extrovert is actually
um filled with enthusiasm as a
consequence of social interactions and
really wants them whereas the introvert
feels drained by that and needs Much
More Time by themselves and perhaps in
nature those are real differences and
you know you can you can mediate between
those to some degree if you're a good
negotiator but you're starting from
basic from different principles from
different a priority principles yeah I
must say those things are very you know
they're very useful I mean that that
whole thing about love languages
I find fascinating the idea that
I mean that's kind of the most
simplistic I think of all the the
relationship tools the idea that
different people have a lot of languages
different people well look a
conscientious person would like to have
a conscientious person would offer
dutiful work to their partner and an
agreeable person would offer empathic
love
no and an extrovert would offer
enthusiasm and and joy and so because
those temperamental differences do in
some sense set what we value and
in some sense reflexively like you can
differentiate your personality with work
and you can develop the traits on the
other side of of you but that takes work
you know you're sort of granted those a
priority values and commitments to begin
with in your temperament it's really
useful to see where you might be
different from your partner you know my
my wife is less polite than me she's
more blunt than me
less highlighting more blood than you
what what I'm actually very high in
agreeableness as it turns out I actually
don't like Conflict at all but I mean I
mean I've watched a couple of your
debates and I would beg to differ on
implements but yeah I know I know you'd
think that but see what's happened to me
is that what I learned partly
being a psychotherapist is that conflict
delayed is conflict multiplied and so
all weighed in when I think there's
something wrong and it tears me into
pieces I really hate it but I know it's
better than putting it off and waiting
for the alternative I mean that's the
the other sort of premise of my book
like is is the it's not kind of it's not
12 rules for life but it's got a lot of
kind of there's a lot of Life advice in
there and the the hard choices now Easy
Life later strikes me as the I mean all
self-help basically says the same thing
prioritize later if you can pass the
marshmallow test when you're five you're
just you're I mean life just becomes
easier spoken like a conscientious
person but yes it's a very good
predictor of long-term success that
ability and the marshmallow test is a
predictor of long-term success as it
turns out yeah I mean there is such a
thing as the as a time machine and I
mean it's just time only moves in this
direction at this speed but you get to
meet yourself in the future and you get
to decide how fit and healthy you are
and how wealthy you are and everything
else besides how happy you're going to
be you it's all kind of it's all a
trade-off and everyone obviously
everyone has a natural bent towards
right now because we live right now at
The Cutting Edge of now is is always
happening so it's always easier to sit
on the couch and do nothing rather than
go to the gym or read a book or whatever
whatever the thing is that's a little
bit challenging if you get if you get
really lucky you can live on the edge
and benefit your future self at the same
time right so that you could fall into
that flow state in a disciplined manner
so that you're present in the present
and you love that because it's so
engrossing and simultaneously uh serve
your multiple future selves that's kind
of a like an optimal uniting
principle you might say and and I think
that signaled to us when we fall into
that flow state is that we're
simultaneously serving well maybe not
only ourselves but other people but also
ourselves across multiple time frames
and that's an instinctual signal that
that's happening yeah it's serving
ourselves over multiple time practice I
think it's a very it's one of those
analogies that's so useful it's
underutilized and so useful to think
about yourself not just as being
yourself solid state noun in this moment
but being a verb over time so the idea
of mortality and deterioration and also
how much health can you give yourself
later on you know who you're working for
you know ultimately you're in a bargain
with yourself and the rest of society
for how you're kind of how you're acting
right now
um it's very very interesting sort of
thing to to think about
so let me turn back to Comedy for a
minute who do you who do you really like
for comedians who who who do you really
find funny that's true reading right now
I mean I suppose it's that thing about
you often find your friends are as funny
uh I mean I find there's a guy called
Neil Brennan who co-created uh the
Chappelle show who has one of the best I
think you would love he's special it's
called three mics it's on Netflix I
think it might be the best comedy
special that anyone's done so the first
mic is jokes one line of jokes not
dissimilar to the kind of thing that I
would do great the second mic is stand
up longer form material you know kind of
routines
and the third mic is the truth and
obviously you start watching Neil's show
and the first five minutes you still
yeah tell us more jokes jokes are fun
give me more jokes then about 30 minutes
in you're like stand up is really good
the standard bits are more fun less
jokes please and then by the end of it
you're just just tell me what happened
with your dad just tell me what happened
it's fantastic it's just it's a really
interesting and the idea that he's made
these very clear distinctions for us I
think a lot of people organically do
that in a show but he literally had
three mics and three different settings
and I thought it was a uh I watched
Chappelle's recent uh so controversial
show and he did a tremendous amount of
Storytelling and one of the things that
was masterful about what he did was that
he tied everything together at the end
so nicely so it was like the whole joke
sequence had a punchline right the whole
story had a point and it was coherent
across all the story and the jokes and
that that so it elevated it to some
degree I think to a place that just
sequences of jokes can can't detain I
mean not that they not that they're not
worthwhile
but there is a sense in which you know
you watch uh better comedians and you go
I've got
I've got a ticket to the lottery right
let's let's imagine there's a Mount
Rushmore of comedy and the four greatest
comedians are up there I'm not on that
Mount Rushmore but I could be I love the
fact that being a comedian is a task
Without End that I can I'm not done yet
I'm in my late 40s and I still feel like
I'm kind of okay I'm in the gym now I
know my way around one-liners I'm pretty
great with jokes storytelling I've done
a little bit of it I put my toe in the
water but I'm not there yet but with the
book certainly I'm becoming better I'm
better at you know opening up and
sharing and it's it's an ongoing I mean
the great thing about most Comics that
are considered to be the greats did
their best work in their 50s and Beyond
well that is interesting because that's
that's at variance with most artistic
Endeavor yeah it's a lot of that happens
in youth it doesn't happen so much with
well it does with musicians even it
tends to be a younger person's
occupation so that's and that's not so
much true for fiction writers if I
remember correctly but it's interesting
that it's not true for comedians yeah
I've got a whole I've got a whole
scenery
reading
people that had made it very early on in
life
you know child Geniuses are really not
when you're a kid it's like ah this
guy's done everything and you feel like
you haven't even started yet so I like
the idea of like I used to often we kind
of bug these people that have made it
later in life I like that kind of that
that thing of like Society worships
youth so much you kind of I like the
idea of going like making it a little
bit later is okay it doesn't have to
happen early it can happen at any stage
I mean my story was of someone in their
mid-20s finding their way in the world
so that kind of the analogy of the
course of life crisis finding purpose
and purpose being the sort of the key uh
that that kind of that that that uh
hero's journey I that can happen at any
stage that can happen in your 50s that
could happen in your 60s it really
doesn't matter
I think it's quite an empowering thing
so are you like Neil Brennan three mics
who else do you think's great at the
moment
um there's a lady called Beth Stelling
you might not be aware of I think she's
a brilliant joke writer and Storyteller
I like uh Michelle wolf uh I like uh in
in the UK there's I mean so many great
comedians uh I've been watching a lot of
my I had a friend that died recently
Sean Locke who was a a huge figure in my
life and obviously when he died the
first thing you do is you sort of go
back and you you look at his work and
you look at all the stand up that he did
and I found him just so incredibly funny
with this guy sure Mark just everything
about him was because he looked a
certain way there was every joke was
kind of heightened because he looked
like a guy that had he looked like a
working man he looked like he'd come to
fix your boiler and then he was doing
this kind of incredibly surreal light
touch jokes and that for me is like
everything was kind of a heightened
surprise because of that
and who do you think were the comedy
greats
I mean I think you know you'd be
hard-pressed not to I mean Richard Pryor
is
um one of you know there's a sense in
which everyone's doing an impression to
a lesser or greater degree of Richard
Pryor
um everyone's attribute act for Richard
Pryor because it's good that he was
named prior then isn't it it seems quite
fitting perfect perfect bit of language
there uh he was an extraordinary talent
and really there's a great Fable in his
life I put this in the book actually
I've done a chapter on Richard Pryor in
the book
um the fact that he was basically it was
a pretty successful comedian he was good
he was on TV uh Bill Cosby was the
biggest comic in the world at the time
um and Richard Pryor was a poor man Bill
Cosby he was doing uh pretty
um mild but very accessible comedy he
was on things like The Tonight Show and
he was very funny in a suit and tie and
you look at the part the short hair and
very uh and around 19
1968-69 his mother died his father was
dying there was the rise in the Civil
Rights Movement this incredible thing
was happening in America and he was on
stage in Las Vegas in front of a
predominantly
white crowd
and he looked around and he said
it
I'm out
and he walked off stage and he walked
away
and he really didn't come back for four
years he went he worked it out in uh in
Black clubs in predominantly black
cities and he didn't even come back
straight away with like people think oh
he came back and he was Richard Pryor he
took him I think it was his third album
back
um this n-word crazy hit and it hit big
but the two previous albums were
underground and he became this he
started using his language he started
being authentically himself he started
it was a it was the good was the enemy
of the best he had this skill set and he
turned it into this he just it was
Transcendent he he became this thing
that was kind of bigger than currently
kind of reinvented the form
um it's an extraordinary inspirational
story about and because of you know the
other things that have happened to him
it's it's literally like the christ-like
story I'm like because he's burnt
himself very badly so
everything the that wasn't burnt away
what remains is the kind of the thing
that I take from that story is like
everything that's not about the essence
of of who he was
um so yeah things burn things burn away
if you listen to your audience
yeah well it's that thing of like what
remains I love quotes
because the quote is what remains when
everything that's not essential
disappears
you know they yeah not many people have
read about that mythology mythological
memories like that you know bowel Sack
or Voltaire or any of that like it's all
no one's read the books but those quotes
keep on coming up because they're just
the truth it just keeps on like it they
keep on reappearing and you know some of
Richard prize lines just keep on
reappearing because you go let's just
start you kind of nail that thing I I
saw Cosby in Edmonton and he did a
two-hour show and he used to come out on
stage with a cigar because you could do
that in those days he just sat on a
stool I was it the stage was completely
bare and he told stories and jokes for
two hours and the audience the guy in
front of me was laughing so hard that he
was almost in convulsions his wife had
to keep elbowing him in the side trying
to get him to straightened up because he
was embarrassing her but he had that
audience in the palm of his hand for two
and a half two hours I believe it was
and they were roaring with laughter
non-stop it was absolutely masterful
tremendously funny dark dark but also
warm he was a great Storyteller it was
really something to see it is I I saw
online in Montreal as well it's it's a
weird one isn't it I think you know the
the separation of someone's work from
their reputation I think is becoming
it's a I mean listen if we can't do that
as a society we need to well we need to
be lovely Gallery because wouldn't it be
lovely if we could always live up to our
best but we don't but well it's also
because you know human beings are are
nuanced and it's and difficult it's it's
frankly it's like I don't think anyone
is the worst thing they've ever done uh
but also with that they're not the best
thing they've ever done People Are
People Are People and sometimes their
work can transcend that but it's you
know my problem with cancel culture at
the moment is I'm slightly suspicious it
might be the new burning books and and
whereas we're very
um arrogant in our secular culture of
our achievements religion does certain
things better uh religion religion has a
road for Redemption and
um yeah forgiveness
Redemption are very underrated in the
world of cancer culture confession as
well right I mean that's a well
confession is a key element in
psychotherapy
yeah that's what you basically do in
Psychotherapy you say here's all the
things I'm doing that might be stupid
and hurtful or the things that have
happened to me that's also a possibility
but it's often the former that are more
useful
so yeah how come you haven't been
canceled
I have several several times I I was uh
I was I had a uh attack Scandal that
nearly ended my career I've had maybe
four or five jokes over the years that
have become a a problem uh you know the
papers it's it's an interesting thing
when it happens when the first time it
happens to you it's very shocking
because you think oh my God I found this
incredible Road I found this life of
being a comedian and I could lose it all
in an instant and that is uh terrifying
and then you realize it's it's kind of
okay it's like you you go well
everything doesn't fall away the people
that like you like you the people that
don't like you have a stick to beat you
with and it's it's often when things are
taken out of context when jokes are
taken out of context like I'm telling
jokes in theaters to a paying audience
of An Evening people have come to see me
they've bought into it I'm not shouting
them through someone's letterbox
at 8am in the morning as they're eating
their Corn Flakes but that's what
happens when it turns up in the
newspaper and if you've seen a joke
written down
you haven't heard the joke
there's a dialogue there's an
interaction with the audience there's
there's a difference between seeing the
words that were in that joke and hearing
that joke and experiencing that joke in
the same way that's probably true for
the most daring jokes you know because
when you're in a live theater and you
say something that's right on the edge
right yeah hilariously funny it's
because you're carried away with the
moment you get this witty idea and bang
you nail it but that sort and that's
right at the edge of what's permissible
you take it out of context it's a
catastrophe here's the thing again you
know you could you can joke about
anything but not with anyone you know
yeah that's for sure my audience is not
the same as your audience so if you go
on the if we if we both decided right
we're going to do a show together and
your audience came to the show and I
opened for you I did 10 minutes at the
top I don't think they would love it
it's like it's a different deadly
overlap there'd be some people but some
people wouldn't you know it's we all we
attract our own audiences to come to the
show and the idea that you go suddenly
then your jokes are held up uh to the
scrutiny of everyone on social media
and the loudest voices are the ones that
ring out other negative voices
and there's something there's something
a bit disingenuous about the press as
well where they'll report a joke yeah a
bit as if but they report a joke as if
you're making a statement and I don't
really make things on stage I make jokes
so you go on the defense is always it
was a joke why do you think the
relationship is between jokes and the
truth I think and it's very interesting
I think it was
um Bertram Russell that said when
something is funny search it very
carefully for a hidden truth
uh yeah yeah well do comedians often say
things that everybody thinks are true
but no one will dare to say I I I think
comedy lives uh at its best
somewhere between
well it lives between public and private
discourse and there's a huge difference
between public and private discourse
certainly at the moment it feels like
it's never been wider but if you watch
uh comedians are even more necessary yes
but yes I'm building my role but you
know that I do if you watch BBC News you
would swear that everyone thinks in the
same way and thinks the same thing about
everything and actually there's a huge
variety of opinion out there and so
different people go down different
rabbit holes into their own media but
you go there's a lot of and comedians
are kind of in the middle trying to make
sense of it all and talking to an
audience and everything a comedian says
has to be based in the level of honesty
because it just isn't funny
so
yeah it's so strange though because
there are truths there are truths that
aren't funny
so what's what is it about truth what is
it about some truths that make them
funny what is exactly the relationship
because funny is a subset of true in
some sense
um so yeah well I don't think a joke
needs to be needs to be true per se it
just needs to often the funniest things
when you're pointing something out
that's the akin to The Emperor's New
Clothes yeah yeah you're pointing out
something that kind of it seems obvious
when you say and everyone kind of goes
oh yeah I guess that's oh yeah or they
go oh well oh yeah we're all like that
hahaha we know that yeah so I would say
it yeah observational comedy does that
job of kind of going you know we've all
had this Human Experience and if you're
talking about something that's slightly
more transgressive in society it's like
it's talking openly about it so there's
a there's a sense in which it mimics
friendship because it's having a
conversation that you you're not walking
on eggshells so political correctness at
a comedy show is like health and safety
at the rodeo it just doesn't it doesn't
sort of belong there it's not to say
that political correctness is is a is a
bad thing it's just saying it's about
the application where does that work I
mean I'm not I think the obsession with
words with Linguistics in PC is kind of
give a what you call me I care how
you treat me so I'm I'm very interested
in social justice but I'm not interested
at all in political correctness and I
think the two have been completed
because it's an easier fight to win
the the you know the straw man is the
language it avoids having to talk about
the real topic a lot of the time yeah I
might also avoid having to confront
those particular demons in your own soul
as well
so
that's a powerful form of avoidance yeah
um it's yes it's interesting
one more question we've gone about 90
minutes and and so why did you want to
talk to me today why did you think that
was a good idea and what sparked your
interest I'm I'm curious I I was uh I
think you're an incredibly interesting
guy because I think there's a uh there's
a sense in which what you're trying to
do uh certainly in 12 rules but I think
you know maps are meaning as well I
think is such a valuable you know you're
reaching out you are a a father figure
for a lot of uh men without fathers
that's the it strikes me that that's a
incredibly uh difficult station to to
take and you you've been given uh I
think a you know a very hard time I
think for for trying to do something
that's incredibly valuable and necessary
and I think in trying to write my book I
I discovered that I wanted to try and
give something back a little bit I
wanted to try and help in some small way
partly is about being a father and it
was about having that energy as a father
of go look
if something happened to me tomorrow
what am I leaving my son what do I you
know something from my kind of ego point
of view saying what do I wanna what do I
think about how the world works and I
felt that my book was something that you
would respond to uh because it you know
it's it's a uh it it's a it's a much
more I mean I kind of went down the
self-help group because I thought it was
low hanging fruit in some sense you know
yourself and Sam Harris are great but
you neither of you know your way around
a dick joke and I felt like there's a
there's a there's a way in which you
know delivering that material with a
lightness uh that that's that it feels
like your audience might might get a
kick out of out of my book uh so I
suppose it was you know self-interest
but also I like what you've done
well thank you that's I thought you know
especially I like what you've done too I
think you're extremely funny and is that
actually your laugh yeah it's it's oh my
God that's so horrible
well yeah I mean
because it's it's that thing where it's
a very very distinctive love but I think
I think a laugh got me into comedy
because my mother's laugh she had enough
she had narcolepsy and she had a thing
called cataplexy which is a bit of
narcolepsy where you lose muscular
control so would you love you often meet
someone that makes no noise when they
laugh
so she had a very extreme version of
that where she would properly kind of
just melt when she laughed so obviously
I was massively motivated to make her
laugh like if she was driving when I was
a kid if you could make a laugh in the
car you'd have to grab the wheel and
kind of steer because she'd kind of
collapsing Giggles properly collapse and
it's uh I don't know I've always been
very I like strange laughs I think
they're uh they're quite magnificent
infectious
there's no doubt about that yeah well
look I really enjoyed talking to you I'm
coming to the UK I'm going to Cambridge
and Oxford I've been there for the last
two weeks in in November and I have a
couple of talks maybe I could shoot you
over an invitation I would I would love
to come I mean you know I work every
night but if they're they're doing that
I'd love to come and see you speak and
I'd love to see you know what what the
reaction is but I think it's I think now
as well the looking at something like 12
rules now
um look I I really think there's a
hunger now post pandemic people have
been locked away for 18 months and
they've had sort of we've come out of
this Collective hibernation and it's
right what am I going to do next what's
my plan like everyone's had that chance
to kind of go like what's the next step
what's the people are searching for for
a little bit of uh of guidance and I
think when you look at you know some of
the things that you talk about certainly
in in maps of meaning the idea that myth
and story and
you know that they're kind of youngin
archetypes of the term I would use you
know they're so important and they're so
sort of uh interesting in our in our
culture because we've kind of slightly
thrown the baby out of the bath water
yeah well that's the sort of thing I'm
going to talk about about Cambridge and
at Oxford so I'll get I'll I'll be in
touch in relationship to that then
we can meet in the UK that would be
really good I'd love to I mean I very
much enjoyed this I thought it was uh it
was just you know a very interesting
free willing conversation I hope uh
people will enjoy and get a kick out of
it and uh yeah more power to you good
luck
same to you and I'm looking forward to
your net next Netflix special to watch
with my wife and crack up at your laugh
I think I think Christmas day yeah but
if if you like if your wife is even more
brutal than you wow she's gonna love it
oh yeah man it's something to argue with
her right because she'll she's really
provocative she'll just nail me with
like these most she can string together
more vicious one-liners than anyone I've
ever heard and sometimes I'll just be
enough friends because I'm so angry and
she makes me laugh
more vicious one-liners than anyone oh
I'll take that
well maybe you'll get the pleasure of
meeting her but you won't see her at her
best I'm afraid yeah I mean lots of
times in the middle of fights we've been
having we're both like I rate you know
at each other and she'll say something
so unbelievably vicious and horrible and
then follow it up with something even
worse it's
it cracks me up it's I just can't
believe she can do it it's really quite
something it's great though but that's
that's kind of what there isn't enough
of in the world like proper debate
everyone it strikes me that we're like
in in the culture wars it's like World
War One everyone's in their trenches and
no one's getting out to have a little
look around in a chat and a you know
discourse it's it's that's where the
game was played the discourse is
everything and and it strikes me that
that's happening now on YouTube because
Academia is there's only there's only
one team have turned up to play and so
you go well that idea of going there has
to be a discourse and there's going to
be there'll be a breakthrough there'll
be they'll but I think it's going to
come from you know popular science books
and YouTube videos is going to be where
people find their way yeah and from
Comedy yes for sure man obviously yeah a
little bit of Light Relief along the way
well a pleasure to
you thanks very much for talking to me
today
the UK and good luck on your tour see in
UK and with your book and in Montreal
next summer the greatest city in the
world yeah it's a great place man I love
Montreal you know Alex Montreal it's uh
it's uh French food American portions
the best and it's also North American
Plumbing and European charm
yeah that does it that sums it up all
right look uh well let's leave it there
I'll screen you again it's okay ciao man
[Music]